# SQL__Import
#### Video Demo:  <https://youtu.be/mr8lfn9Qr0Q>
#### Description:

NOTE: The files were written/executed outside of CS50 codespace. See Requirements.py for implementation details!

My final project is a Python program that uploads Excel files and delimited text files to SQL. There are three main files needed to run the program: Requirements.py, UploadExcelToSQL.py, and ImportTables.py.
Requirements.py contains some brief notes on which version of Python needs to be installed and which libraries (and versions) should be loaded before running the remaining files. I included a code block to check the versions, so a user needs to verify this step is done correctly before continuing. Otherwise, they may encounter compatibility issues between different libraries if conflicting versions are downloaded. Also included is the command used to install the packages using pip. Here are the current versions I used: 
•	Python: 3.13.7,
•	pyodbc: 5.2.0
•	SQLAlchemy: 2.0.43
•	Pandas: 2.3.1
•	NumPy: 2.3.2
•	Openpyxl: 3.1.5
The next file, UploadExcelToSQL.py, contains the function definitions that will later be called to run the import process. There are a few helper sub-functions involved, which get fed into the main upload function. These are responsible for actions like validating file directories, playing audio cues for a successful or failed execution, and creating an Excel file to list the runtime details. The core logic of the function is fairly simple – connect to SQL using SQLAlchemy, load the source file into a pandas DataFrame, then send the Excel file to SQL. 
The specifics under the hood are a bit more complex. 
The SQL_Connect function establishes the connection from Python to the SQL server + database using an instance of the SQLAlchemy/pyodbc engine. This allows raw SQL syntax to be written and executed on the specified server. Here is where the user needs to set the SQL location. 
File_Exists is a function that returns a Boolean value based on the presence or absence of a file (provided via the file path parameter). This is used as a condition to prevent errors later in the process if the source file doesn’t exist. 
Format_Datetime is a function that takes datetime input and returns it as a formatted string type value. This gets used at runtime when printing statements to the terminal for the user, and it is also used during the creation of the import log.
The Get_Elapsed_Time function returns a tuple containing 2 strings. The first string is a numeric representation of the total runtime, and the other provides a more readable visualization using time units like days, hours, minutes, and seconds. This also gets passed to the Log_Import function.
The Log_Import function uses the openpyxl library to create and manipulate Excel sheets. Within this function, I import data collected from the Upload_To_SQL function to append a row of data into the workbook. This allows the user/developer to track runtime states like execution time, and record counts of the tables, data sources, and more. This becomes more important in situations where the process imports multiple Excel files by batch; in that case, the log can be used to track when the batch starts and finishes, and the individual start and end times for the files within the batch.
Play_Sound is a function that uses sounds within the default Windows sound bank to give audio cues to the user. If the function runs without error, a soft beeping sound plays to signify a successful import has been completed. When a harsher beep plays, it indicates an error has occurred and needs to be reviewed within the terminal.
Upload_To_SQL is the main function that incorporates the other functions I have previously listed. Much of the functionality exists within pandas, but my function combines a few different processes of the library in a simpler way. For example, with a few adjustments of the arguments I’ve listed in my function’s definition, you can omit specific rows and columns, or specify the data types of the specific columns. Without the abstraction provided by my function, a user would have to write and edit multiple lines of code instead of a single line (for the function call). Tasks like determining the file extension of the source file, reading the DataFrame, removing columns, formatting data types, and submitting the file to SQL are all tasks that invoke specific methods of the pandas library and would otherwise need to be separately and explicitly called in order to produce the same result. 
The ImportTables.py file is where the arguments are supplied to the parameters listed in the Upload_To_SQL function. Here, a user can supply a source file name, sheet name, columns and/or rows to omit, the destination table name, and a dictionary containing the columns and data types as key-value pairs (used to force conversions of data types for the final SQL table). By running this file, a user will import the files listed into SQL. Additionally, the tables are compressed as well.
Most DBMS applications, such as Microsoft SQL Server, have processes to import files, but my program enables a developer to automate importing multiple files through code, as long as the data in the file matches the specifications provided in the function call. If there are any errors, I’ve embedded an error handling routine to address some common ones. Depending on the volume of the data, a user or business can potentially see significant savings in the time spent importing tables and the space used within the server when storing them as well. 

